### Question

- **number**: 31
- **section**: Synaptic Transmission and Plasticity
- **question**: What are gap junctions, and how do they impact the function of neural networks? 


### Answer

Gap junctions are direct electrical (and chemical) connections between the cytoplasmic compartments of two cells. They are created by the "docking" of two membrane-bound pores called connexons (themselves hexamers of monomeric proteins called connexins). The diameter of these pores is 1.5nm so that ions and second messenger molecules can flow through them but proteins cannot. In contrast to chemical synapses the transmission at gap junctions is practically instantaneous. At electrical synapses the current that depolarizes the postsynaptic cell is generated in the pre-synaptic cell. At gap junctions the signal received by the post-synaptic cell is directly proportional to the membrane potential of the pre-synaptic cell even if the presynaptic potential is too low to generate an action potential. Most gap junctions convey both positive and negative current and are bidirectional. (However, some gap junctions have voltage-sensitive gates that positive charge to flow in only one direction, e.g. the crayfish giant motor synapse. Most gap junctions close in response to an increase in calcium or a drop of the pH value; this serves to decouple healthy neurons from damaged neurons. Neurotransmitters released by nearby cells can also modulate the degree to which gap junctions are open. Gap junctions also convey metabolic signals: e.g. cAMP and Ca2+.) 

Gap junctions allow for extremely rapid, bi-directional, sign-preserving synchrony across cells in a neural network through direct electrical transmission. A network of neurons connected by gap junctions acts as a single neuron with two important differences:

1. Firing the network requires more input current than firing a single neuron. 
1. The output of N coupled neurons is N-times as strong, i.e. N action potentials at a time.

The referenced pages of Kandel end with some excellent examples of the ecological use to which such a network dynamic can be put:

1. Aplysia's ink-release is triggered by a network of three electrically coupled motor neurons. Their synchronous firing makes massive amounts of ink splash out explosively. Furthermore the higher threshold reduce the risk of releasing ink in the absence of danger.
1. Control of saccades in certain species of fish
1. In mammals electrically coupled inhibitory inter-neurons generate synchronous high-frequency oscillations
1. The inputs to the Mauthner neuron that initiates the gold fish's escape response is rapidly activated via electrical synapses.

### Refs

* Kandel & Schwartz 5e, _Cells at an Electrical Synapse Are Connected by Gap-Junction Channels_, pp 180-5.
