### Question

- **number**: 60
- **section**: Neuromodulation and Brain State
- **question**: What is spontaneous activity in the nervous system? Is it random? What does it arise from?


### Answer

**Spontaneous activity is any neural activity that is not driven by a stimulus or task.** It occurs during quiet wakefulness, sleep, and under some forms of anesthesia. It also occurs in slice preparations as "slow oscillations" or "**UP/DOWN states**", which is my area of familiarity with it. The up-state and the down-state are two sub-threshold membrane potentials (e.g. -80mV and -50mV) that occur disproportionally often because the neuron's membrane potential spontaneously oscillates back and forth between them. These slow, regular, oscillations can be caused by intrinsic properties of single neurons, network dynamics, or both.

In cortex, this spontaneous activity arises from synaptic transmission. In slice, it arises from *spontaneous vesicle release*, either cortico-cortically or cortico-thalamically. The mechanism under anesthesia or in sleep is controversial.

Though spontaneous activity is generated, as far as we can see, randomly, **its patterns are highly-structured and non-random**. This apparent paradox is resolved when we consider that this random process is occurring in a system that is itself very structured: **connectivity and internal neural dynamics tightly constrain the possible patterns of neural activity**. When you close your eyes the activity in your visual cortex is no longer driven by a stimulus but reflects spontaneous activity. This spontaneous activity leads to regular, slow, synchronous oscillations at a frequency of about 10 Hz that is known as *alpha oscillations* and is clearly visible in EEG recordings. *Resting-state fMRI* data indicate that spontaneous neural activity also has structure at the macro-level that is *determined by the structural and functional connectivity* between brain regions. The most common such structure is the *default-mode network* comprising the medial PFC, the medial-temporal lobe, and the posterior cingulate. 

### Refs

First, a theoretical approach to the origins of spontaneous activity, based on in vitro recordings and modeling:

* Orlandi et al., 2013. Noise focusing and the emergence of coherent activity in neuronal cultures.

The next two references provide empirical evidence that spontaneous events aren't 'random' in the simplest sense, and their abstracts and bibliographies are excellent resources:

* Cossart, Aronov, and Yuste, 2003. Attractor dynamics of network UP states in the neocortex.
* Luczak et al., 2010. Spontaneous events outline the realm of possible sensory responses in neocortical populations

Finally, this reference sort of straddles the above groups, observing avalanche structure in vivo and relating that to theories of neural networks "on the edge of chaos":

* Peterman, Plenz, et al., 2009. Spontaneous cortical activity in awake monkeys composed of neuronal avalanches.

Background information on UP/DOWN states and neural oscillations at rest:

* http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Up_and_down_states
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neural_oscillation

resting state fMRI and the default-mode network:

* Greicius, M. D., Supekar, K., Menon, V., and Dougherty, R. F. (2009). Resting-State functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network. Cerebral Cortex, 19(1):72-78.
