---
layout: post
title:	"Describe the key cortical areas and subcortical structures of the motor system.  Give an example of how these components contribute to the performance of a simple motor task such as reaching and how they contribute to the performance of a skilled action like playing the piano."
date:	2016-04-09
category:	"control-of-movement"
---
## Answer

This answer is almost criminally short
given the richness of detail
with which we know the various systems mentioned.
Many of these systems are discussed in greater detail
in other blog posts,
and so relevant links are provided to encourage deeper engagement
with the components of the motor pathway.

The important cortical structures for
planning and executing voluntary movement
are the primary motor cortex (M1),
the premotor and supplementary motor areas (PMA and SMA),
and the prefrontal cortex (PFC).

Subcortically, the most critical structures are
the [basal ganglia]({{site.baseurl}}/14),
the [cerebellum]({{site.baseurl}}/16),
and the [spinal cord]({{site.baseurl}}/71).

[M1 executes movements]({{site.baseurl}}/13)
by sending signals to the spinal cord,
wherein reside the lower motor neurons, which
[communicate with the muscles]({{site.baseurl}}/35).
Sequences generated by M1 are gated by the
[basal ganglia]({{site.baseurl}}/14).

These ganglia are in close communcation
with the PFC, which makes executive decisions
about which goals to pursue
on the basis of
[value information]({{site.baseurl}}/64)
computed by other
[frontal structures]({{site.baseurl}}/66)
and
[mid-brain structures]({{site.baseurl}}/65).

PFC also communicates with SMA and PMA,
sending them a continual stream of potential goals
to turn into motor plans,
without regard to whether they will eventually be
[approved by the basal ganglia]({{site.baseurl}}/14).

Pre-motor area acts, among other things, as a "staging area",
ramping up its firing during the run-up to movement.
It also contains the "mirror neurons",
which fire not only during a certain action,
but also while watching someone else perform that action,
or even when imagining that action!

The supplementary motor area generates motor sequences:
short, stereotyped collections of actions.
The stimulation of SMA neurons produces these stereotyped actions,
like raising the arm to a given position,
or baring the teeth.

Check out the
[UTH online neuroscience textbook](http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s3/chapter03.html)
for more information about these areas, and about M1.

During sustained movements,
the brain must keep track of whether the resulting movement
is the one it planned for,
or whether an error has occured,
due to, for example,
an unexpected change in load --
e.g. a toddler grabbing onto your leg --
or due to incorrece sensory information,
as when one has a bit too much to drink,
or when a cat
[overestimates its jumping ability](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Awf45u6zrP0).

This task falls to
[the cerebellum]({{site.baseurl}}/16),
which integrates sensory signals with motor commands
and adjusts spinal output accordingly.

### During reaching

When the decision to reach is made by the prefrontal cortex,
it sends a signal to the PMA to prepare a reach
and another signal to the basal ganglia
encoding the value of the reach target.
The PMA recruits the SMA, which produces a series of activations
representing, e.g., the rotation of the wrist,
the lifting of the arm,
and then the bending of the elbow.
These activations take effect by recruting specific
collections of cells in M1,
which,
after passing their activations past the filter of the basal ganglia,
direct the upper motor neurons of the spinal cord
to activate their pools of lower motor neurons
in just such a way that the desired reaching motion is achieved.

### While playing the piano

All of the above occurs,
with perhaps more two-way communication between the PFC
and the basal ganglia regarding the correct action selection --
is now the time for Debussey or *Piano Man*?

If the piece is well-rehearsed,
then the SMA will have sequences already prepared,
while an improvization
would require the cooperation of the frontal areas
and the PMA.
Playing along with a teacher would recruit
the mirror neurons of the PMA,
as would the highly imaginative act of an air guitar solo.

For a complex movement like a sonata,
the feedback of the cerebellum will be critical --
especially if the piano is a novel one,
with differently weighted or spaced keys.
