---
layout: post
title:	"Give an example of a wiring process mediated by an activity-dependent competitive mechanism."
date:	2016-04-07
category:	"development"
---
## Answer

Activity-dependent competitive mechanisms
abound in the nervous system.
Of special interest is the development
of the connection between motor neurons
and the skeletal muscles,
which relies on an activity-dependent competition
with particularly high stakes:
life or death for the neurons!

## Two Cells Enter, One Cell Leaves

In addition to constructing a miniature
model of the world inside your skull
for you to inhabit,
the brain is also tasked with generating
sequences of actions in the real world.

The brain's primary effectors are the skeletal muscles,
more commonly known as the muscles.
When you feel the desire to take a step forward,
reach for an object,
or scratch an itch, the
[motor cortex]({{site.baseurl}}/12)
must determine how to tug on these big bundles of springs
in order to swing the bones to which they are attached
in precisely the correct fashion to produce
the desired movement.

These commands rely on a well-made interface
between the nervous system and the muscles.
Each muscle fiber needs to be matched to
exactly one neuron,
and all of the motor neurons need
to be matched to at least one muscle fiber.

To complicate matters further,
the neurons in question are born inside the spinal cord,
induced to adopt their fate by
[a variety of morphogens]({[site.baseurl}}/32),
while the muscle cells are born far away,
in a totally different germ layer,
and, in one final twist of complexity,
assemble themselves,
[Voltron-style](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZZv5Z2Iz_s)
into a single, more powerful muscle fiber.

So how are we to ensure that our motor neurons
and our muscle fibers are well matched?

One
[modest proposal](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1080/1080-h/1080-h.htm)
is to generate far more neurons than you need,
and any that don't manage to find a motor neuron
can just be killed.
In order to ensure that this *diktat* is followed,
nature adopts a strategy straight out of
[*Saw II*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saw_II):
motor neurons are, from the moment they are born,
searching frantically for the antidote
to a poison that will kill them when a timer runs out.
They are, like Biggie Smalls,
[born ready to die](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/9/97/Ready_To_Die.jpg).
The antidote is released by motor neurons,
but it is only released in small quantities
and to synaptically-connected neurons
that drive depolarization of the muscle.

So, the motor neurons rush out from the
[ventral horn of the spinal cord]({{site.baseurl}}/71),
making a mad dash for the nearest muscle cell,
guided by the various
[axon guidance factors]({{site.baseurl}}/34).
Some cells find a partner and begin to form synapses,
[also called neuromuscular junctions]({{site.baseurl}}/35),
but others are not so lucky.
These unlucky cells are drawn to the spurts of antidote
that diffuse away from these immature synapse
in a desperate attempt to survive,
and then they are locked in a duel to the death
with the original tenant --
whoever can make a stronger synapse faster will survive.

Only about half of the motor neurons born in the ventral horn
will survive to become functional.

Brutal.
