---
layout: post
title:	"What is a morphogen? How do morphogens generate different cell fates in the spinal cord?"
date:	2016-03-20
category:	"development"
---
## Answer

A morphogen is a protein or signaling molecule
that drives the differentiation of primoridal tissue
into its final form -- it is the source, *genesis*,
of the shape, *morphê*.

In the spinal cord,
multiple morphogenetic gradients
conspire to create a broad variety of cell types.

## Ontogeny Recapitulates Phylogeny

In the history of life of Earth,
organisms have increased in complexity,
beginning with single-celled organisms,
which bound together to create multi-cellular organisms,
then organisms with body plans,
and then finally the vertebrates and invertebrates.
If we were to trace our ancestry as humans,
we would pick up the trail at the bony fish,
pass through the earliest beasts of the land,
neither mammal nor reptile,
to our furry, milk-making ancestors,
and then finally to humans.

Whenever a new human being is created
from the fusion of a sperm and egg,
this evolutionary history repeats itself,
sped up billions of times
and acting on the miniature scale of a single fetus.
Though it is not a perfect reconstruction,
the similarities are striking enough
that they gave rise to the polysyllabic slogan
"Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny" --
the process of an organism coming into being
repeats the process of evolution.

Due to the complexity of this task,
and the centrality of this literal
self-replication
to our understanding of biological principles,
the process of building an organism out
of one cell and a bunch of raw material
has become its own branch of biology:
*developmental biology*.

The development of the nervous system has drawn
particular attention not only because
the intricacy and complexity
of neural tissue necessitate
that nature use her wiliest tricks and deepest principles,
but also because the creation of the nervous system
touches directly on issues of profound philosophical import:
where does our perception come from? Why can it be trusted?
How are experience and sensory data balanced with
hard-wired, genetically-encoded principles?

Developmental biology has a reputation of blandness,
driven by its detail-orientation and its plethora of acronyms.
In a sense, it is to biology what biology is to the other sciences:
it smacks of
["stamp-collecting"](http://trhvidsten.com/docs/Hvidsten_Docent2012.pdf).

This reputation is unfair.
The study of developmental biology is driven by
these feelings of wonder and passion:
wonder at the astounding observation that
intricate structures arise from an undifferentiated clump of matter,
and a passionate, pre-scientific commitment to either
nature or nurture as the determinant of human destiny.

So with these grand feelings in mind,
let us dive from the clouds of abstraction
into the weeds of biological detail.

## Establishing Structure: Reaction-Diffusion

The term *morphogen* dates to 1952,
when it was invented by
[Alan Turing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing),
father of the computer.

In his essay
["The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis"](http://www.dna.caltech.edu/courses/cs191/paperscs191/turing.pdf),
Turing sets out to explain the curious fact that
clumps of cells that start out spherically symmetrical
can break that symmetry and become bilaterally symmetric --
the same on the left side as on the right.

The importance of his solution is that it arises naturally
from the interactions of relatively simple components.
Each cell is presumed to both secrete diffusible chemicals
and also to use those chemicals to regulate internal reactions,
some of which produce other diffusible chemicals.
These are the chemicals he calls "morphogens",
and the model is known as a "Reaction-Diffusion Model".

The surprising result is that
there need not be any primordial asymmetry in the model
in order to generate asymmetric results.
By analyzing the form of the differential equations
that describe the dynamics of reaction-diffusion models
on a hollow sphere,
Turing discovers that tiny deviations,
like those caused by random jostling and even thermal noise,
are amplified<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/32#dagger">†</a>.
The eventual result is the development of an axis
defined by the location of these deviations.

With an axis like this in hand, it is straightforward to
construct models that use simpler mechanisms to generate
Let's turn now to a concrete example of such a model,
the differentiation of the spinal cord.

## Morphogens and the Spinal Cord

The primordial axis that Turing's theory describes
runs from the head of the animal to the tail:
it is the anterior-posterior axis.
Along this axis, a special structure arises,
known as the *notochord*.
The notochord is a flexible but stiff semi-compressible organ,
much like the tongue.
In the early chordates, this structure served as a
simple spinal column.

In vertebrates, the notochord exists solely to organize development.
It releases a morphogen called "noggin",
which causes the cells located close to the notochord to become neurons.
These cells fold into a tube, which becomes the central nervous system.
The spinal cord remains a tube, while the brain continues to fold
and twist to create the structure we are familiar with.

This undifferentiated tube needs to eventually take on the
dorsal-ventral pattern that characterizes the
[functional anatomy of the spinal cord]({{site.baseurl}}/71) --
motor neurons on the bottom, sensory neurons on the top.

The notochord continues to have an influence on the spinal cord,
including in the specification of cell fates.
The notochord also secretes a morphogen known as
"Sonic Hedgehog" (seriously).

This rather bizarre name deserves a bit of comment.
The *hedgehog* family of genes was named for the effect
of mutations to this gene family in flies.
Rather than growing sparsely and generally,
the bristles on *hedgehog* mutant
flies grew densely and on the spine,
giving the pupa the appearance of a hedgehog.
As various members of the *hedgehog* family were discovered,
they were named after species of hedgehog:
*Indian hedgehog*, *Pygmy hedgehog*, and so on.

Due to the relative difficulty of genetic work in vertebrates
compared to invertebrates,
the vertebrate version *hedgehog*
was one of the last *hedgehog* genes to be discovered,
and the community had already used up the various species of hedgehogs
on the invertebrate versions.
Partly as a joke, the name *Sonic Hedgehog* was suggested,
and it stuck.

But I digress.
Secretion of Sonic Hedgehog, or *Shh*,
causes the cells of the spinal cord that are close
to the notochord to change their gene expression patterns,
giving rise to the motor neurons of the ventral spinal cord.

On the other side of the spinal cord,
the *dorsal* side,
other cells release a different set of morphogens,
primarily of the *Bone Morphogenetic Protein*, or *BMP*, family.
These drive the cells of the dorsal spinal cord to become
spinal interneurons, which mediate messages to the motor neurons
from sensory neurons and from neurons projecting from the cortex.
BMPs and other morphogens also induce the neural precursor cells
that didn't make it into the tube to become the sensory neurons
of the dorsal root ganglia, among other things.

### Footnotes

<a name="dagger">†</a> The critical role for random fluctuations
and uncertainty in changing the theoretical behavior
of the differential equations in this model
presages the eventual development of
[chaos theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_theory).
